README.md, before:

# xsearch search utility

### Overview

This repository tracks the `xsearch` utility, which allows PCMDI users to query CMIP5 and CMIP6 data. The utility returns dataset paths for a given search criteria.

These dataset directories can be used with [xarray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/) and [xcdat](https://xcdat.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to open and read the data (e.g., via `xcdat.open_mfdataset()`). The **x** in `xsearch` denotes that the search is supposed to complement `xarray` and `xcdat`.

`xsearch` makes use of json files that store dataset directories and associated metadata. The json files are organized by experiment and variable: `jsonDirectory/experiment/variable.json`.

### Getting Started

You should be able to add the xsearch package to your `PYTHONPATH`. In your `.bashrc` file add:

    export PYTHONPATH='/PATH/TO/XSEARCH/'

If the xsearch version is incremented you will receive a warning on import:

> Note that xsearch has been updated to version 0.0.2.
>
> You were last using version 0.0.1.

`xsearch` will create a file in your home directory to support version checking.

Alternatively, you can download the contents of this repository and import the package (or the `search.py` file). In this case, we suggest you watch the repository (in GitHub) so that you know when there are version changes.

`xsearch` is built around metadata logic documented in the [CMIP6 Global Attributes, DRS, Filenames, Directory Structure, and CV’s document](https://goo.gl/v1drZl). These logic underpin the filename and directory creation, written by [CMOR](https://cmor.llnl.gov/) and other CMIP-writing libraries. The [CMIP6 CMOR Tables](https://github.com/PCMDI/cmip6-cmor-tables/tree/master/Tables) (e.g. Amon - designate A=atmospheric realm, and mon=monthly frequency), similar logic underpinned the [CMIP5](https://github.com/PCMDI/cmip5-cmor-tables/tree/master/Tables) and [CMIP3](https://github.com/PCMDI/cmip3-cmor-tables/tree/master/Tables) phases.

### Support

Note that this software library is designed to help PCMDI users search for CMIP data. If the search works correctly, but points to a dataset that has problems (e.g., a corrupted or incomplete dataset) these issues should not be logged as an issue / bug in this repository.

Contributions from users of this utility are critical (issue reports and contributed code to improve the package or address bugs).

### Usage Examples

    import xsearch as xs

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('historical', 'tas', 'mon')  # always need to specify an experiment / variable / frequency

> Multiple values for cmipTable. Consider filtering by cmipTable.  
> Available values: Amon, ImonGre, ImonAnt
>
> Multiple values for realm. Consider filtering by realm.  
> Available values: atmos, landIce

The search warns that the returned paths include data that spans multiple realms and multiple tables. You can add optional facets to select one realm/table:

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('historical', 'tas', 'mon', realm='atmos', cmipTable='Amon')
    print(dpaths.keys())

> ['/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1-m/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r1i1p1/v20120709/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1-m/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r2i1p1/v20120709/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1-m/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r3i1p1/v20120709/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r1i1p1/v1/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r2i1p1/v1/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r3i1p1/v1/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r10i1p1/v20110901/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r1i1p1/v20110901/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r2i1p1/v20110901/tas/',  
> ...

Note that, by default, `dpaths` is a dictionary and that each key is a dataset path. Each dictionary entry contains dataset metadata:

    key = list(dpaths.keys())[0]  # get the first key
    print(key)  # print dataset
    print(dpaths[key])  # print metadata for this dataset

> /p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r10i1p1/v20110901/tas/  
> 
> {'keyid': 'CMIP5.CMIP.CNRM-CERFACS.CNRM-CM5.historical.r10i1p1.Amon.atmos.mon.tas.gu.glb-z1-gu.v20110901',  
>  'mip_era': 'CMIP5',  
>  'activity': 'CMIP',  
>  'institute': 'CNRM-CERFACS',  
>  'model': 'CNRM-CM5',  
>  'experiment': 'historical',  
>  'member': 'r10i1p1',  
> ...

Each entry in the returned dictionary is a nested dictionary in which the dataset path is the key with the following entries: **keyid**, **mip_era**, **activity**, **institute**, **model**, **experiment**, **member**, **cmipTable**, **realm**, **frequency**, **variable**, **grid**, **gridLabel**, **version**, **timepoints**, **nfiles**, **nc_creation_date**, **sumfilesize_bytes**, **has_zero_size_files**, **created**, **modified**, **accessed**, **retired**, **retire_datetime**, **retracted**, **retracted_datetime**, **ignored**, **ignored_datetime**, **comment**, **unique**, **alternate_paths**.

For example, to get the model of one dataset directory, `p`, we would use:

    print(dpaths[p]['model'])

> CNRM-CM5

Several functions in `xsearch` can further use the full metadata dictionary returned by `xsearch`. One function allows the user to get all values for a given search facet:

    xs.getValuesForFacet(dpaths, 'model', 'E3SM*')

> ['/p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190913/',  
>  '/p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r2i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190729/',  
>  '/p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r3i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190729/',  
> ...

This function supports wildcard searches. Another search function allows the users to get all values for a given facet:

     xs.getGroupValues(dpaths, 'model')

> ['CNRM-CM5',
>  'bcc-csm1-1',
>  'bcc-csm1-1-m',
>  'GFDL-CM2p1',
>  'GFDL-ESM2G',
>  'GFDL-ESM2M',
> ...

Other search facets include: `mip_era` (**CMIP5** or **CMIP6**), `activity` (e.g., **CMIP** or **ScenarioMIP**), `institute` (e.g., **E3SM-Project**), `model` (e.g., **E3SM-1-1**), `member` (e.g., **r1i1p1f1**), `grid` (e.g., **gn** or **gr**), or `gridLabel` (e.g., **glb-z1-gr**).

Searches can also include a wildcard (`*`) in required search terms or for additional facets:

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('ssp*', 'tas', 'mon', cmipTable='Amon', realm='atmos', activity='Scenario*')
    print(xs.getGroupValues(dpaths, 'experiment'))

> ['ssp119', 'ssp370', 'ssp245', 'ssp126', 'ssp434', 'ssp534-over', 'ssp585', 'ssp460'] 

The user can also specify a number of optional arguments:

* `deduplicate` (default `True`): flag whether to de-duplicate so that a single dataset path is returned for each unique combination of model and member. If one of multiple possible datasets are chosen, the alternates are listed in `alternate_paths` (see `fullMetadata` option). Make sure to read the note on de-duplication below.
    * criteria: The ordering of criteria used to deduplicate. The default is `["version", "timepoints", "nc_creation_date", "esgf_publish", "gr"]`, which orders by a) newest version, b) number of timesteps, the c) creation_date embedded in netCDF file metadata, and a prioritization for data that has been d) published on ESGF and e) has the grid label `gr`.
* `printDuplicates` (default `False`): If True, all potential paths will be printed and paths that are chosen will be denoted with an asterisk
* `verbose` (default `True`): flag to print out information during the search
* `lcpath` (default `False`): flag to adjust the data directories to reflect the LC (Livermore Computing/LLNL HPC) mountpoint
* `filterRetired` (default `True`): flag to filter out datasets that are retired (datasets are retired if they are moved)
* `filterRetracted` (default `True`): flag to filter out datasets that are retracted
* `filterIgnored` (default `True`): flag to filter out datasets that have been marked as ignored
* `jsonDir` (`str`): This defaults to the current location for the json metadata files, but the user can modify this
* `fullMetadata` (default `True`): flag to specify the datatype returned. If true, `xsearch` will simply return a dictionary with complete metadata for selected paths. `xsearch` can also return a list of paths by setting `fullMetadata=False`:

### A note on de-duplication

Note that `xsearch` is configured to de-duplicate for each set of paths related to each model and model realization. For example, if you have several versions of data for **Model A** / **r1i1p1f1**, `xsearch` will select the most recent and complete version for you. 

But for a given model and realization, there may be more aspects of the data than the dataset version. For example, if we search for all variables beginning with `ta` for `E3SM-1-0`:

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('historical', 'ta*', 'mon', realm='atmos', cmipTable='Amon', member='r1i1p1f1', model='E3SM-1-0', printDuplicates=True)

We get a message noting that we are spanning multiple variables:

> Multiple values for variable. Consider filtering by variable.                                      
> Available values: tauu, tauv, tasmin, tasmax, ta, tas

`xsearch` chooses one dataset (of the datasets spanning several possible variables) for a given member (`r1i1p1f1`):

> \* /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/ta/gr/v20220108/  
>   
> duplicate: /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tauu/gr/v20190913/  
> duplicate: /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tauv/gr/v20190913/  
> duplicate: /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/ta/gr/v20191220/   
> duplicate: /p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190913/  
> ...

This isn't typically a problem if you specify an exact experiment, variable, and frequency.


### Acknowledgements

Much of the de-duplication logic and ideas from this are from the [durolib](https://github.com/durack1/durolib) library, created by Paul Durack [@durack1](https://github.com/durack1) to search for CMIP data. durolib handled [CDAT](https://cdat.llnl.gov/) xml files, which could be used to read in multi-file datasets. Logic to produce the xml files was refactored in [xagg](https://github.com/pochedls/xagg). xagg xmls are being phased out in favor the current approach: rapidly searchable json files, which allow the users to locate datasets and read them in with xarray based tools. Stephen Po-Chedley [@pochedls](https://github.com/pochedls/) produced the `xsearch` initial version.

Commit message:

Add 'setup.py' for install
This update allows users to import xsearch in an individual conda environment. 

* add setup.py
* update README.md to document alternate installation method using `setup.py`

Co-authored-by: Stephen Po-Chedley <pochedley@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# xsearch search utility

### Overview

This repository tracks the `xsearch` utility, which allows PCMDI users to query CMIP5 and CMIP6 data. The utility returns dataset paths for a given search criteria.

These dataset directories can be used with [xarray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/) and [xcdat](https://xcdat.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to open and read the data (e.g., via `xcdat.open_mfdataset()`). The **x** in `xsearch` denotes that the search is supposed to complement `xarray` and `xcdat`.

`xsearch` makes use of json files that store dataset directories and associated metadata. The json files are organized by experiment and variable: `jsonDirectory/experiment/variable.json`.

### Getting Started

You should be able to add the xsearch package to your `PYTHONPATH`. In your `.bashrc` file add:

    export PYTHONPATH='/PATH/TO/XSEARCH/'

If the xsearch version is incremented you will receive a warning on import:

> Note that xsearch has been updated to version 0.0.2.
>
> You were last using version 0.0.1.

`xsearch` will create a file in your home directory to support version checking.

Alternatively, you can download the contents of this repository and import the package (or the `search.py` file). In this case, we suggest you watch the repository (in GitHub) so that you know when there are version changes. You can either add `export PYTHONPATH='/PATH/TO/YOUR/XSEARCH/'` in your `~/.bashrc` or use the following commend to make xsearch importable:

    python setup.py install

`xsearch` is built around metadata logic documented in the [CMIP6 Global Attributes, DRS, Filenames, Directory Structure, and CV’s document](https://goo.gl/v1drZl). These logic underpin the filename and directory creation, written by [CMOR](https://cmor.llnl.gov/) and other CMIP-writing libraries. The [CMIP6 CMOR Tables](https://github.com/PCMDI/cmip6-cmor-tables/tree/master/Tables) (e.g. Amon - designate A=atmospheric realm, and mon=monthly frequency), similar logic underpinned the [CMIP5](https://github.com/PCMDI/cmip5-cmor-tables/tree/master/Tables) and [CMIP3](https://github.com/PCMDI/cmip3-cmor-tables/tree/master/Tables) phases.

### Support

Note that this software library is designed to help PCMDI users search for CMIP data. If the search works correctly, but points to a dataset that has problems (e.g., a corrupted or incomplete dataset) these issues should not be logged as an issue / bug in this repository.

Contributions from users of this utility are critical (issue reports and contributed code to improve the package or address bugs).

### Usage Examples

    import xsearch as xs

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('historical', 'tas', 'mon')  # always need to specify an experiment / variable / frequency

> Multiple values for cmipTable. Consider filtering by cmipTable.  
> Available values: Amon, ImonGre, ImonAnt
>
> Multiple values for realm. Consider filtering by realm.  
> Available values: atmos, landIce

The search warns that the returned paths include data that spans multiple realms and multiple tables. You can add optional facets to select one realm/table:

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('historical', 'tas', 'mon', realm='atmos', cmipTable='Amon')
    print(dpaths.keys())

> ['/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1-m/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r1i1p1/v20120709/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1-m/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r2i1p1/v20120709/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1-m/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r3i1p1/v20120709/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r1i1p1/v1/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r2i1p1/v1/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/BCC/bcc-csm1-1/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r3i1p1/v1/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r10i1p1/v20110901/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r1i1p1/v20110901/tas/',  
>  '/p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r2i1p1/v20110901/tas/',  
> ...

Note that, by default, `dpaths` is a dictionary and that each key is a dataset path. Each dictionary entry contains dataset metadata:

    key = list(dpaths.keys())[0]  # get the first key
    print(key)  # print dataset
    print(dpaths[key])  # print metadata for this dataset

> /p/css03/cmip5_css01/data/cmip5/output1/CNRM-CERFACS/CNRM-CM5/historical/mon/atmos/Amon/r10i1p1/v20110901/tas/  
> 
> {'keyid': 'CMIP5.CMIP.CNRM-CERFACS.CNRM-CM5.historical.r10i1p1.Amon.atmos.mon.tas.gu.glb-z1-gu.v20110901',  
>  'mip_era': 'CMIP5',  
>  'activity': 'CMIP',  
>  'institute': 'CNRM-CERFACS',  
>  'model': 'CNRM-CM5',  
>  'experiment': 'historical',  
>  'member': 'r10i1p1',  
> ...

Each entry in the returned dictionary is a nested dictionary in which the dataset path is the key with the following entries: **keyid**, **mip_era**, **activity**, **institute**, **model**, **experiment**, **member**, **cmipTable**, **realm**, **frequency**, **variable**, **grid**, **gridLabel**, **version**, **timepoints**, **nfiles**, **nc_creation_date**, **sumfilesize_bytes**, **has_zero_size_files**, **created**, **modified**, **accessed**, **retired**, **retire_datetime**, **retracted**, **retracted_datetime**, **ignored**, **ignored_datetime**, **comment**, **unique**, **alternate_paths**.

For example, to get the model of one dataset directory, `p`, we would use:

    print(dpaths[p]['model'])

> CNRM-CM5

Several functions in `xsearch` can further use the full metadata dictionary returned by `xsearch`. One function allows the user to get all values for a given search facet:

    xs.getValuesForFacet(dpaths, 'model', 'E3SM*')

> ['/p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190913/',  
>  '/p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r2i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190729/',  
>  '/p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r3i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190729/',  
> ...

This function supports wildcard searches. Another search function allows the users to get all values for a given facet:

     xs.getGroupValues(dpaths, 'model')

> ['CNRM-CM5',
>  'bcc-csm1-1',
>  'bcc-csm1-1-m',
>  'GFDL-CM2p1',
>  'GFDL-ESM2G',
>  'GFDL-ESM2M',
> ...

Other search facets include: `mip_era` (**CMIP5** or **CMIP6**), `activity` (e.g., **CMIP** or **ScenarioMIP**), `institute` (e.g., **E3SM-Project**), `model` (e.g., **E3SM-1-1**), `member` (e.g., **r1i1p1f1**), `grid` (e.g., **gn** or **gr**), or `gridLabel` (e.g., **glb-z1-gr**).

Searches can also include a wildcard (`*`) in required search terms or for additional facets:

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('ssp*', 'tas', 'mon', cmipTable='Amon', realm='atmos', activity='Scenario*')
    print(xs.getGroupValues(dpaths, 'experiment'))

> ['ssp119', 'ssp370', 'ssp245', 'ssp126', 'ssp434', 'ssp534-over', 'ssp585', 'ssp460'] 

The user can also specify a number of optional arguments:

* `deduplicate` (default `True`): flag whether to de-duplicate so that a single dataset path is returned for each unique combination of model and member. If one of multiple possible datasets are chosen, the alternates are listed in `alternate_paths` (see `fullMetadata` option). Make sure to read the note on de-duplication below.
    * criteria: The ordering of criteria used to deduplicate. The default is `["version", "timepoints", "nc_creation_date", "esgf_publish", "gr"]`, which orders by a) newest version, b) number of timesteps, the c) creation_date embedded in netCDF file metadata, and a prioritization for data that has been d) published on ESGF and e) has the grid label `gr`.
* `printDuplicates` (default `False`): If True, all potential paths will be printed and paths that are chosen will be denoted with an asterisk
* `verbose` (default `True`): flag to print out information during the search
* `lcpath` (default `False`): flag to adjust the data directories to reflect the LC (Livermore Computing/LLNL HPC) mountpoint
* `filterRetired` (default `True`): flag to filter out datasets that are retired (datasets are retired if they are moved)
* `filterRetracted` (default `True`): flag to filter out datasets that are retracted
* `filterIgnored` (default `True`): flag to filter out datasets that have been marked as ignored
* `jsonDir` (`str`): This defaults to the current location for the json metadata files, but the user can modify this
* `fullMetadata` (default `True`): flag to specify the datatype returned. If true, `xsearch` will simply return a dictionary with complete metadata for selected paths. `xsearch` can also return a list of paths by setting `fullMetadata=False`:

### A note on de-duplication

Note that `xsearch` is configured to de-duplicate for each set of paths related to each model and model realization. For example, if you have several versions of data for **Model A** / **r1i1p1f1**, `xsearch` will select the most recent and complete version for you. 

But for a given model and realization, there may be more aspects of the data than the dataset version. For example, if we search for all variables beginning with `ta` for `E3SM-1-0`:

    dpaths = xs.findPaths('historical', 'ta*', 'mon', realm='atmos', cmipTable='Amon', member='r1i1p1f1', model='E3SM-1-0', printDuplicates=True)

We get a message noting that we are spanning multiple variables:

> Multiple values for variable. Consider filtering by variable.                                      
> Available values: tauu, tauv, tasmin, tasmax, ta, tas

`xsearch` chooses one dataset (of the datasets spanning several possible variables) for a given member (`r1i1p1f1`):

> \* /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/ta/gr/v20220108/  
>   
> duplicate: /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tauu/gr/v20190913/  
> duplicate: /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tauv/gr/v20190913/  
> duplicate: /p/user_pub/work/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/ta/gr/v20191220/   
> duplicate: /p/css03/esgf_publish/CMIP6/CMIP/E3SM-Project/E3SM-1-0/historical/r1i1p1f1/Amon/tas/gr/v20190913/  
> ...

This isn't typically a problem if you specify an exact experiment, variable, and frequency.


### Acknowledgements

Much of the de-duplication logic and ideas from this are from the [durolib](https://github.com/durack1/durolib) library, created by Paul Durack [@durack1](https://github.com/durack1) to search for CMIP data. durolib handled [CDAT](https://cdat.llnl.gov/) xml files, which could be used to read in multi-file datasets. Logic to produce the xml files was refactored in [xagg](https://github.com/pochedls/xagg). xagg xmls are being phased out in favor the current approach: rapidly searchable json files, which allow the users to locate datasets and read them in with xarray based tools. Stephen Po-Chedley [@pochedls](https://github.com/pochedls/) produced the `xsearch` initial version.
